--- PAGE 1 ---
A Journey of Functional Test Evolution in the Public Sector
Bruno Pedraça de Souza Rebeca Campos Motta Jessica Soares da Costa
UFRJ and UNIRIO UFF UFRJ
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil Niterói, Brazil Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
bpsouza@cos.ufrj.br rcmotta@id.uff.br jessicacosta@cos.ufrj.br
Elaine Nunes Gustavo Rocha Barreto Pinto Rafael Maiani de Mello
CAPGov - COPPETEC CAPGov - COPPETEC UFRJ
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil Rio de Janeiro, Brazil Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
elainenunes@cos.ufrj.br grbpinto@gmail.com rafaelmello@ic.ufrj.br
ABSTRACT teams, including a team for test automation. We expect that our
report may contribute to supporting the mapping and
Since 2015, a public legal institution in Brazil has relied on a
improvement of software quality practices in the public sector.
large-scale information system to support its services. As the
system's complexity and business relevance increased over the
2 Project Characterization
years, functional testing evolved from an ad-hoc, manual
approach to a systematic, automated practice integrated into the 2.1 Client and Development Team
development workflow. This paper reports on the evolution of the
maturity stages, detailing the challenges encountered and key This experience report is based on an ongoing long-term
milestones achieved by adopting Selenium IDE automated tool partnership with a public-sector organization in a state of Brazil.
The client organization operates in the legal domain, specifically
testing. It also presents the main lessons learned by the testing
within the justice system. The motivation for the project came
team over this long-term process. Notably, process adjustments,
from a strategic change in several Brazilian courts of justice to
regression testing strategies, and the adoption of Selenium IDE
replace paper-based processes with digital processes) [3].
were instrumental in enhancing software quality. By sharing this
At the beginning of the project in 2015, the client’s digital
trajectory, we aim to provide practical insight into other
infrastructure was minimal, and legal procedures were largely
institutions facing similar constraints and demands.
manual. The client recognized the need for digitally integrated but
despite the discussions about establishing the solution architecture
KEYWORDS
evolving quickly, proper software development strategies,
Software Testing, Selenium IDE, Experience Report including those for quality assurance and testing, were not yet
defined. Today, the client operates with significantly higher digital
expertise, motivated by the complexity and volume of legal
1 Introduction
services it delivers. The pandemic period accelerated a shift
Software systems for the public sector play a critical role in toward remote service delivery and digital inclusion, granting
delivering essential services to citizens. The development and complexity to the quality assurance process.
maintenance of these systems often operate under unique The system was conceived and is currently maintained by a
constraints such as limited budgets, high turnover, complex third-party team composing the [omitted] program. This program
regulations, and the need to serve large and diverse populations develops and maintains software solutions for the public sector,
[1]. Therefore, ensuring the quality and reliability of such systems working under the coordination of a university technology
is not only a business concern but also a matter of public interest. foundation, offering services across project management,
This paper addresses the experience of maintaining a core software development, and testing. Initially, the team had 20
information system from a Brazilian legal public institution over a software professionals and operated with limited maturity.
decade. More specifically, we report the evolution of functional According to early project reports, agile development was
software testing practices for such systems, which initially lacked limited, focused mostly on task breakdown and iteration planning
formal processes and specialized roles, but gradually matured into - but lacking formal design or testing specialists. Requirements
a structured quality assurance (QA) with automated support activities were informal, driven by meetings, evolving document
Selenium IDE tool [2]. drafts, and direct client interactions, and there was no specific
In the following sections, we describe the system team for quality assurance and testing.
characterization and how the testing practices evolved over time. Currently, the system has significantly evolved, and the team
Grounded in this experience, we compiled practical lessons, has around 100 professionals, with several technical capabilities.
highlighting the key role of organizational support in shaping The testing squad focuses on functional testing, a type of
testing strategies and composing dedicated functional testing software testing based on the functional requirements of the

--- PAGE 2 ---
SAST’25, September 22–26, 2025, Recife, PE Souza et al.
system [4]. Currently, the testing squad is composed of twelve Stage 1 – Report-oriented, retrospectively documented
dedicated professionals, organized into manual (six people) and (2018–2022). It began with the definition of a testing leader and
automated testing (six people). the hiring of the first analysts devoted to manual functional testing.
With the formation of the testing team, all functional tests began
2.2 System Characterization to be conceived and executed only by testers. Upon completing
The software system under development is composed of multiple the testing cycle of each sprint, testers documented the scenarios
interconnected components designed to support the evolving tested for each issue in a shared spreadsheet. The description of
needs of the client institution. The system’s development has each scenario included its goal and the steps to be followed.
followed the institutional mission of the client, which is centered However, the expected results were still not documented, and
around offering legal support to citizens across a state of Brazil. testing data were often omitted or outdated.
As a result, the software must adapt to a wide variety of Stage 2 – Test case-oriented, retrospectively documented
workflows, user profiles, and legal domains—ranging from (2022–2023). To promote the automation of functional testing, the
criminal defense and civil disputes to administrative and family project hired a software engineering researcher specialized in
matters. Over time, four distinct waves have shaped the system: software testing and allocated one member from the manual
1. Process Monitoring (2015): Started focusing on enabling testing team to focus on automation. Considering the project
systems users to track and organize information about assisted characteristics and the profile of the testers, they identified
individuals, including case history, appointments, and internal Selenium IDE [1] as the best option. In parallel with the creation
documents. of an appropriate environment for automation, they diagnosed
2. Public Assistance (2016): As demand increased, new three key challenges for implementing an automated testing
modules were introduced to manage appointment queues, process: i) Lack of proper testing documentation: As noted in
referrals, and services, aiming to reduce bottlenecks in first- Stage 1, essential elements of test cases were missing, hindering
contact services. the automation process. ii) Late documentation: Test cases were
3. Monitoring of Incarcerated Individuals (2018): The third typically written only after deployment, making it unfeasible to
expansion responded to the need for managing cases of automate them during development. iii) Poor programming
incarcerated clients. This involved tracking sentencing practices for automation: These included unfriendly navigation
information, custody status, and rehabilitation timelines, requiring structures, improper element naming, and random generation of
integration with legal oversight mechanisms. form element identifiers. To address these issues, the specialist
4. External Integration (2020-current): It has expanded its initiated a series of targeted actions. First, the testing team
interoperability with external parties, enabling service delivery, received training on how to write effective and comprehensive
reflecting a broader trend toward digital transformation in legal test cases, aiming to improve documentation quality and
services. Key integrations include the postal service database consistency. In parallel, meetings were held with project
(Correios), inclusion of artificial intelligence (AI), the Federal leadership to renegotiate sprint timelines and ensure that test case
Service (Receita Federal) for retrieving official data, and major writing could be integrated earlier in the development process.
judicial process systems such as PJe, EPROC, and DCP. Additionally, the specialist identified critical navigation paths
within the system and began developing automation scripts to
What began as a single-purpose platform has grown into a support regression testing. To facilitate automation and
complex, multi-service ecosystem that serves 20 thousand internal maintainability, development teams were also instructed to adopt
users, 2 million processes and 2.7 million registered people. consistent naming conventions for all form elements, addressing
one of the key technical barriers to automation.
3 Functional Testing Stages
Stage 3 – Partially automated, documented (2023–2024).
At the beginning, functional testing activities [5] were issue- After significant progress in addressing previous challenges,
oriented. In the project context, an issue (described in user story functional test automation was incorporated into the sprint
format) may relate to the development of a new feature, the workflow of the issues implemented by one of the two
evolution of an existing one, or bug fixing, where the scope of test development teams. This team was chosen due to its smaller size
automation covers all. and the nature of its work, mostly maintenance of less complex
features. At this point, most test cases were documented during
Stage 0 – Ad-hoc (2015–2018). This stage began with the
development, allowing for timely automation and retesting in the
project kickstart. During this stage, the system was under
release environment. Three new testers were hired and trained to
continuous development. However, at the end of this stage, the set
support this effort. Automated regression testing was introduced to
of features was relatively small. During Stage 0, there was no
the release testing phase, significantly reducing the number of
dedicated team for testing or even testing leaders. The functional
bugs reported in production and identifying merging issues.
tests were carried out by the developers themselves during the
However, timely test documentation remained a challenge. To
sprints' workflow, without the concern of writing scenarios or
address this, a strategy was introduced to pair manual and
providing detailed test reports.
automation testers, aiming to integrate and accelerate
documentation and automation. Despite initial success, this

--- PAGE 3 ---
A Journey of Functional Test Evolution in the Public Sector SAST’25, September 22–26, 2025, Recife, PE
initiative faced scheduling conflicts and shifting priorities and was Selenium IDE commands allow testers to easily assign each test
ultimately discontinued. Less than 10% of functional tests were case description and its steps in the logs.
identified as non-automatable due to test scenarios exceeding
Sharing knowledge to overcome tool limitations. Despite the
navigation boundaries (e.g., validating documents). Although this
ease of using Selenium IDE, its command library has some key
was a minor percentage, automation coverage remained between
limitations. Regardless, Selenium IDE allows testers to insert
60% and 70% per sprint due to documentation delays.
JavaScript (JS) functions and instructions in its recordings.
Stage 4 – Fully automated, promptly documented (2024–
Besides, it is possible to store and manipulate the values returned
ongoing). Following the successful automation efforts of one team,
from running these scripts. A simple example addresses using a JS
by mid-2024, the test automation team assumed responsibility for
command to get the current system date to be used in native
testing across the entire system. Although the tester pairing
Selenium IDE commands. In this sense, sharing knowledge is
initiative did not yield all the expected results, it effectively raised
essential to avoid reworking. The automated testing team
awareness about the importance of accessible, timely test
maintains a single repository to support all automation activities.
documentation. Taking advantage of a postponed deployment in
late 2024, technical leaders prioritized clearing the testing
5 Conclusion
documentation backlog, renegotiating priorities, and refining
sprint workflows. As a result, automation coverage increased This experience report presented the long-term evolution of
significantly in the subsequent sprints. software testing practices in a public sector information system.
Over nearly a decade, testing activities matured from informal,
undocumented practices to a structured, partially automated, and
4 Lesson Learned
eventually fully automated process. Each stage reflected
During the stages followed for automating the functional tests, we organizational shifts, growing technical complexity, and
learned important lessons. we discuss the major ones: awareness of quality assurance's value. Key enablers of this
evolution included team specialization, early documentation, and
The efficiency of regression testing strongly depends on the the adoption of tools like Selenium IDE. Despite setbacks, such as
coding standards. The automation of functional tests allowed the documentation delays and process misalignments, the initiative
adoption of regression testing for the first time in the project. demonstrated that significant quality gains are achievable even
After regression testing, we observed a considerable and stable under the constraints of public administration.
decline in bug reporting by system users. From regression testing,
Based on this trajectory, we identify three promising research
it is expected to be fast and autonomous (re)execution. However, directions: (i) evaluating the cost-benefit and scalability of
the effort spent with regression testing may considerably increase lightweight automation tools in public sector systems, (ii)
if poor programming practices are applied. Some practices, such exploring how automated test artifacts (logs and reports)
as the random generation of identifiers, may lead testers to contribute to traceability, auditability, and compliance, and (iii)
manually fix several recorded steps, which may take more time studying the adoption curve of no-code and low-code tools among
than manual testing. non-programmer testers. By sharing this journey, we hope to
inspire other public institutions to invest in testing practices as a
Selenium IDE is a practical alternative for populating testing path to delivering more reliable and sustainable services.
data. In large and complex business systems such as our system, it
may be challenging to continuously develop and maintain ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
database scripts to update testing data after restoration.
This paper is a result of a real Research&Development project.
Alternatively, our experience showed that recording and
maintaining data inclusion scripts through Selenium IDE is The authors also thank CNPQ and CAPES - Finance Code 001.
alternative. Besides, it minimizes the need for support from
database teams for testing. REFERENCES
Selenium IDE is a practical tool for beginners in automation. [1] Yuri Lima, Luana Passos and Jano M. de Souza. 2025. Analysis of automation
and retraining opportunities for the Brazilian federal public service. Conference
The initial version of the automated testing team was composed of
on Digital Government Research. https://doi.org/10.59490/dgo.2025.1031
functional testing experts, but most of them were inexperienced [2] Selenium IDE. Retrieved July 1st, 2025, from https://www.selenium.dev/pt-
with testing automation. Despite this limitation, they quickly br/documentation/ide/
[3] Marcus Parreiras, et al. Inteligência artificial aplicada para o aumento da
embraced Selenium IDE due to its intuitive interface, ease of use
produtividade no atendimento de intimações. WCGE. SBC, 2022. p. 180-191.
as a browser plugin, and the ability to record automated test [4] Jan Severo and Valéria Lelli. 2023. Testing Maze: an educational game for
scripts. These characteristics significantly streamlined the teaching functional testing. Proceedings of the XXXVII Brazilian Symposium on
adoption process and accelerated the training of new team Software Engineering. 2023. https://doi.org/10.1145/3613372.3614191
[5] Glen J. Myers, Corey Sandler and Tom Badgett. 2011. The art of software
members.
testing. John Wiley & Sons.
Selenium IDE logs may be used for self-document functional
testing. The testing team is responsible for assuring that the
system meets user requirements through testing activities. With
the adoption of Selenium IDE, the testing team can export user-
friendly logs describing each navigation step applied. Besides,